[Music]
there's a line that I really love from
the Gospel of Thomas quote if you bring
forth what is within you what you bring
forth will save you if you do not bring
forth what is within you what you do not
bring forth will destroy you I really
love this as kind of an intro to one of
the core pieces of of our work which is
emotional fluidity and I'm really
excited to finally get to this topic
which feels so core to the word and in
85 episodes we've only talked about it
through nearly every episode without
directly addressing about it so yeah
yeah so let's let's do this sounds good
yeah let's start by talking about what
it is what is emotional
fluidity
yeah so emotional fluidity is the
capacity to feel all of your emotions
and to allow them to move through you
without any resistance
so and that's partially in time like
sometimes it's important to
compartmentalize things like if you need
to save your child from a car accident
you don't want to start feeling grief
you want to like go and save your child
from the car accident um but generally
it's also kind of a mark of time it's
like how long do you hold on to emotions
and do they stagnate in your system so
it's how how well you can process how
quickly you can process how fully you
can process your emotions and let them
flow through you if you look at babies
they're great examples of emotional
fluidity they can go from happy to
sad really quickly or angry or upset and
they and they don't hold on to anything
in the past right it's just it all kind
of moves through them that's not to say
that it's emotional fluidity like a baby
in the fact that you're out of control
of your emotions though it's odd you are
out of control in your emotions but your
emotions don't control you so when
you're younger it's often that there's
this feeling like your emotions control
you and so you go through this natural
process of trying to manage or contain
your emotions and then you can learn
that you can have your emotions without
them controlling you and then the
fluidity is really important to allow
them all to move through you but it's
like they they don't they don't control
you at the same time you don't control
them meaning the emotions are going to
come you don't get to decide what they
are you don't get to decide well that's
irrational to have that emotion it's
like nope those are the emotions that
are here and they're all going to move
right through me so that's what
emotional fluidity is yeah beautiful so
the the capacity to allow emotions to
move through us and I also noticed like
there's an with emotional fluidity
there's an absence or at least a
fluidity within shame or guilt or
resistance how does how does that show
up yeah that's right so the yeah so if
you look at like judgment or guilt
resistance shame those are often stag
they often stagnate the emotions
the core emotions get stagnated with
those emotions and so it's allowing
yourself to feel those completely and
then pretty soon they stop arising very
much if at all and so so but even if
they arise they don't stagnate your
system so often times like somebody
feels guilty about something or they
feel shame like they might have done
something wrong they'll just go over and
over and over the emotional Loop and
so seem or dissociate from it yeah
that's another example yeah
yeah so one one way of kind of
describing this is that there's or maybe
one metaphor for this is that it's like
a like range of motion for your body but
in your in your emotional
system yes yeah yeah you could think of
it is emotional like flexibility like
yoga right you have like a bigger range
of emotion and it also means that you're
not avoiding any emotional experience
anymore so it's not like I don't want to
feel that so I'm going to rrange my life
not to have to feel that I'm I'm going
to avoid these conversations I'm going
to avoid these people I'm going to avoid
these business opportunities yeah um so
it's also making it's also the fluidity
allows you to make friends with all the
emotional experiences and then you don't
have to avoid them you don't have to
spend your whole life you know trying to
have a particular emotional experience
yeah yeah in the in the body metaphor
there it would be like like favoring a
knee for many many years and then
developing all this extr musculature and
other habits around avoiding something
going on the body if we do the same
thing for our emotions then we're going
to end up having having a lot of
patterning around that yeah and I I
would say the other thing that's that's
beautifully put and the other thing that
happens is that um so you you have this
fluidity in the emotional experience and
in that fluidity there's also something
that happens which is a bit difficult to
explain but it's the best way I would
say it and it's and it breaks people
when I say this so is you enjoy all the
negative emotions there's actually like
an a deep enjoyment of what what was
once considered a negative emotion and
because you're not resisting it it
doesn't control you anymore so there's
like this just deep enjoyment of of
anger or heartbreak or sadness yeah yeah
yeah there's a distinction there between
acceptance like reluctant acceptance of
an emotion and enjoyment which brings me
to the next next series of questions
here what is not emotional fluidity
specifically what is not emotional
fluidity that people commonly associate
with it or would would
associate and and call emotional
fluidity yeah um I don't know how much
people would use the word generally but
I think that there is something like oh
I felt everything in like a meditative
space you know I would not call that
emotional fluidity the the The Watcher
of the em like if you're identified
fully in The Watcher which I think is a
fine thing of the emotion experience
there's nothing wrong with that by any
stretch but that's not emotional
fluidity unless it's embodied like The
Watcher can still be online but there
needs to be an embodiment with it so
there needs to be a for emotional
fluidity to work you're not trying to
manage it through through watching it
you're you're actually in love with it
and you said it's an acceptance yeah
you're experiencing it and and as some
point you said oh it's like acceptance
of is this is an acceptance I would say
it's a welcoming it's like oh I can't
wait to I can't wait to feel sad again I
can't wait to feel upset or jealous it's
like there's there's lessons in it for
me there's it's a pure signal it's um I
can enjoy it it teaches me how to be a
better human and and that's what I think
breaks people is when they're like how
on Earth could I ever enjoy being angry
or how on Earth and and yet it like I
watch people find it all the time so
it's definitely possible yeah something
that struck me about what you said there
is it's it's okay to observe it but also
we need to experience it and I'm curious
what happens if we flip that around if
you are just experiencing it but you're
lost in it and there's no observation or
perspective on it could be another way
yeah yeah that would be extremely slow
process that would also could
potentially get you lost for decades
yeah so it's it's really important to
have that self-awareness and the
experiencing of it both um the more that
you can see it not as yourself and just
as like a wave coming through you the
quicker emotional fluidity
happens um but it you'll stall it if you
don't experience it if if it becomes
like this something that is like so
detached from you or you're so
dissociated with so it has to be
embodied for the whole process to work
really well and smoothly and quickly
yeah and how about letting go like I'm
going to let go of my sadness it's time
to let go of my grief I look I was angry
but then I just let
go yeah no
fact no no again you don't get a choice
on on what emotions you're feeling so to
just say let go is
like the emotional experience is the
emotional experience you have what you
might let go of actually is a as a
thought pattern like like they hurt me
and therefore the emotion goes away with
it right or they're they're the they're
the bad one and I'm the good one that
that could hold an emotional experience
in place for a long period of time so
there are definitely thoughts that you
can let go of that that you can see
through and then the emotional
experience will change that that can
happen um but you can't and also I would
say that you can fully feel an emotion
and then the thought changes that
happens all the time I see people
finally release anger and all of a
sudden they can see clearly so many
things
um it's particularly around the things
that they were clear about are the
things that they hadn't drawn boundaries
around um yeah but but you what you
can't do is just like go an emotion
emotion is like braathe you're always
having an experience of one and you
don't get to choose what what it is so
you can't let go of an emotion you can
you can let go of a thought that changes
your emotional experience right just as
much as you couldn't let go of having an
experience in this moment right now
that's correct happening yeah it's
happening yeah I can't stop it right
yeah okay so so why cultivate emotional
fluidity what's so important about
it life hurts without it like life is
life like there's a lot of
stagnation um it's harder to get to
Clarity um but Mo mostly it's it hurts
it's
like like look at any part of your life
that hurts and then notice that there's
emotional stagnation there it's like
really really common that there's
emotional stagnation in this those areas
so that's one of the things um it
creates blind spots for us so if we are
avoiding certain emotions because we
don't want to feel them like feeling
like a failure or feeling not valuable
or feeling sad then we're going to
create an entire life experience like I
I don't know how many people have come
to me who are like really high-powered
Executives and they want to start
something on their own
and they their entire life has been
based on not feeling feeling valued
feeling like they're providing value and
then they're not sure how they're going
to do that on their own they don't know
who they're going to provide value to
and so it's it stops their entire
entrepreneurial experience so it totally
changes your experience um that's
another one um I think the other thing
is
um there's identity identity that can be
lost in an emotional experience too and
so if you can't move it like I don't
know how many people identify as angry
or just the other day someone's like can
you help me with being a dick and it's
like you've identified with being a dick
which means you've identified with anger
like because you're not actually having
full fluidity on that emotional
experience so it also kind of like
limits us through that kind of um that
kind of identification thing I'd say the
the interesting thing about it is that I
think it's really important to say this
I think when what could be happening in
some people's Minds when I say emotional
fluidity they might think like oh that
means that I easily get angry at anybody
and start yelling at them or I easily
cry at people or um I'm like wildly out
of control my anger because like and and
it's like hurting everybody around me or
or My like I have temper tantrums or
whatever I hold people hostage with my
emotional
experience that is not at all what what
I'm speaking about when I say emotional
fluid it and in those cases the emotions
are very constricted there's a lot of
Shame around having the emotions there's
a lot of trying to control other people
with your emotions none of that is
welcoming your emotional experience so I
think that's a really important thing to
say even to the point where the other
day I was talking to somebody and they
were saying to me they were saying oh
how you define anger is different how
the rest of the world defines
anger and and it's and it's I'm I'm
defining the energy
wants it's unresisted instead of the
energy resisted so that energy of like
anger or let's do sadness sadness
resisted can be like I'm not sad it can
be a form of low-level depression it can
be it can be somebody being passive
aggressive you know like I'm sad but I
don't want to feel it so I'm going to
attack you all of those can
be but that feeling of sadness
unrestricted that actually is like an A
Joyful relief Rel almost like it's a sad
release but it creates this joyful
release
that's that's how I would describe it
and so that all comes with emotional
fluidity as well that as you allow and
welcome all these emotions your
experience of them changes
because they're not resisted and so like
your experience of anything changes
whether you're resisting it or not
resisting it right I feel like what you
just said traces back to a kind of
cultural belief system around
emotions being seen as manipulative like
a lot of times people say when people
refer to an emotion they're referring to
the behaviors of projecting that emotion
at somebody yeah not necessarily the
direct sensory visceral experience of
being with that emotion and just fully
enjoying it right I don't want to be
angry because I don't want to do what my
dad did to me by controlling me through
anger I don't want to be sad because I
don't want to be weak like my mom
because Mom was actually trying to get
people to take care of her through her
sadness right like so absolutely I think
that the resistance that people have to
the emotional experience is because
they've been manipulated by it or and
because they don't love it in themselves
yeah okay so these are these are a
number of ways that the lack of
emotional fluidity affects our lives how
about what does emotional fluidity bring
to our lives how does it open things up
for us when we have it when we've opened
up to it so so so many
ways like I can't even begin to tell you
like the the goodness that it brings
into your life uh so let let's let's uh
let's let's turn it into a way of
thinking like how does it benefit your
head how does it benefit your heart how
does it benefit your body I think are
really good ways to think about it and
by head I mean like your intellectual
ual experience by heart I mean your
emotional experience and body um that's
going to that's going to capture a lot
maybe a little nervous system and a
little um musculature
because when we resist emotions we hold
our muscles and so it has a huge effect
on our body so okay so let's start with
that so if we were going to go with head
for instance um wow so many things um it
really prevents bad habits often times
bad habits are something that you do
because you don't want to have a certain
emotional experience um it makes
decision making a ton easier
because oftentimes as I've talked about
so many times on this that it's our
emotional center of our brain that makes
the decision so we're using logic to try
how to feel a certain way or not feel a
certain way and if you welcome emotions
you have a lot more flexibility to feel
whatever way so it really helps with
that um decisiveness um in decision
decision making also that emotional
fluidity does a tremendous amount for
decisiveness because you're not so
worried about getting it right or wrong
all the time and usually people who are
indecisive are really scared to get it
wrong um or sometimes get it right um
which is ultimately associated with a
feeling right is exactly exactly yeah
the wrong feeling wrong yeah exactly um
reduces judgment because judgment is
something that we do to not feel um it
um increases clear-headed discrimination
so for instance if I really want to feel
successful I'm more likely to buy into
the scam like a pyramid scheme if I
really want to feel abundance I'm more
likely to buy into a pyramid scheme if
I'm really want to feel like a
successful venture capitalist I'm more
likely to buy
into you know some technology
that somebody has raised a couple
hundred million dollars on so a lot of
clear-headed stuff happens because you
don't need to feel a certain way you're
not scared to feel a certain way um it
speeds up learning because there's less
shame you're what you're you welcome the
all the ups and downs of the learning
process so it speeds that up um it stops
the stagnation of like um that people
have like going over the same thing over
and over and over again because they're
trying to avoid an emotional experience
how about the
heart the heart um heart heart heart
yeah uh what is do so the most important
thing it does is it really increases joy
and love it um that that like Joy is as
I'm sure I've said this Joy is the
matriarch of a family of emotions and
she won't come into a house where her
children aren't welcome the other way to
think about this is like you're a dock
and you have one a place for one ship
and the ship that is naturally there is
Joy but if you have another one parked
there and it hasn't moved you're not
you're not going to get to the Joy is
not going to be there there you're going
to be in a depression or whatnot so so
it totally increases your capacity to
love because there's nothing to defend
against anymore it increases your
capacity to feel Joy because which is a
very natural state like if you look at
kids when they're not like two or three
year olds when they're not experiencing
a different emotion when all the
emotions have moved through it's like
Joy is just the thing that's kicking
around in there more tenderness more
connection more trust
because you're willing to feel the
Heartbreak of of love right all love
comes with heartbreak all love comes
with disappointment all love comes with
being let down from time to time and if
you're willing to feel those things you
have no reason to avoid the love um and
so therefore more
connection also less emotionally
avoidant behaviors like less things
where you're feeling like shame and
therefore oh I feel so much shame right
and I don't want to feel the shame and
therefore I'm going to drink or
therefore I'm going to smoke a lot of
pot or therefore I'm going to do
anything like that and less spiraling
and wallowing and kind of circling in it
in a collapse yeah less depression all
those things happen yeah it's I mean
it's it
is it is
amazing how like how quickly life
changes if you feel the that up for
you to feel in the moment it's just
insane how quickly Life Changes how much
how much more joy and happiness and
Clarity there
is yeah just an overall vitality and
aliveness of it yeah like drinking
drinking from the fire hose of life if
you if you don't have your full
emotional experience you're missing a
significant chunk of your overall
potential experience in life your kids
come to you with their Joy that's
natural for them and like how much can
you be with that joy and allow it to
move through you as well yeah my my my
personal experience of it is it's like
the difference between using your phone
black and white and color it's like huge
difference and I remember when this was
really like when it first like you know
when anything like this cracks open
widely there's like a moment of like
holy this is so different the
contrast points it out and I remember I
used to say that it felt like life had
become a dream that I never thought
possible coming true that was the
experience of life it was just like it
was very vital and very alive very
um like it just had a broad spectrum to
it that it hadn't before yeah and and I
could love easily even if someone didn't
love me was you know or hated me even it
just changed a tremendous amount yeah
which which speaks to another another
component here is that your joy becomes
less contingent on external
circumstances less contingent on other
people's emotions being a certain way
for you to feel something you could be
in deep Joy with your kids being angry
right and that shows that changes the
way that you show up in your entire life
and the way that others experience
you yeah that's right yeah yeah and
there's like a there's certain emotions
like incapacity for instance like to
feel really incapable to feel helpless
in a
situation they do it does certain things
like it allows you to be far more um
capable oddly right like if you fully
allow that feeling
then you
stop you stop trying to control things
you can't control and there then you
start really focusing on the things that
you can so that each
emotion that you start to allow yourself
to feel has its own benefit you know
anger allows ghost creates some clarity
sadness creates like a certain kind of
joy and fear creates excitement like
more excitement in your system so each
one of the emotions that you start
allowing has like its own little Flav
flavor of positivity that comes yeah
yeah yeah so so let's talk a little bit
about how it shows up in the
body yeah so as I was saying about this
the um so right now if you're listening
to this podcast and just like allow
yourself to feel let's just use a simple
one like allow yourself to
feel scared for a moment right we're all
living with a little bit of fear
somewhere so you you know you allow
yourself to feel scared feel what that's
like in your body and then now stop
feeling scared no matter what you do
make sure that you do not feel scared
and I guarantee what just happened is
that your muscles constricted a little
bit because you can't stop an emotional
experience without a physical holding
and so if you've been holding the same
thing physically for years and years and
years you're going to get chronic pain
and stress you're going to have muscular
skeletal issues um it's why you've heard
probably heard of people who have been
doing like you know particular kinds of
yoga where they start crying in the
middle of the yoga class because they're
like releasing a certain emotional
experience that they've been holding on
to for a long
time um I've had experiences of people
some some of them have been public about
this which is like they had like a
certain thing happening in their throat
and then they released anger and the
pain in their throat just totally
changed so I've seen that kind of thing
countless examples of that kind of thing
in our in our work yeah and a lot of a
lot of disease traces back to Aces they
call them like adverse childhood
experiences and that's that's an example
of like something that can happen in
your childhood that creates an emotional
constipation of sorts a traumatic
experience that doesn't get processed
and how a lot of the research has been
pointing to that being a major cause of
Downstream disease of all sorts later in
life right yeah absolutely and and the
other thing is that um the other thing
that happens is that there's
like the a lot of people have issues
where they dissociate they numb they
can't even identify the emotions that
they have all of that stuff and their
body starts going away they become far
more perceptive of their emotional
reality they're more in touch with it
they don't numb they don't want to numb
that's another thing that happens in the
body and I think the last thing is it
just like Your Capacity to feel pleasure
really increases in that process your
sex will change your orgasms will change
your like all of that kind of pleasure
experience also deeply changes as you
allow the emotional experiences and and
what I noticed too is like if I have a
room full of a 100 people and I'm like
okay we're all going to feel sadness and
cry like people will go for like 45
minutes and they'll be totally focused
on it or an hour hour and a half even
we've seen it or anger and then I'm like
hey everybody okay we're gonna just
experience pleasure and after like five
minutes half of them are dissociated
they're like you know they don't
say this but they're like thinking
about something else they like ah it's
like wait you have full permission to
feel pleasure and you're like ah so
that's another another thing and even if
you just if you're listening to this if
you you know practice feeling pleasure
it's a great way to increase emotional
fluidity as well because as you start
practicing that feeling of
pleasure other things will come up to
prevent that experience from happening
and then you can process them and then
go back to the pleasure yeah yeah
something else that we see often is also
your what you want changes a lot on a
physical level since we're talking about
the body here the foods that you want to
eat the substances that you want to
regulate yourself with or not or yeah
just by by shifting your overall
Baseline state of how much you are
comfortable being in your state as it is
and how much you're trying to leave it
or how attuned you are to your body's
signals and how much it's really craving
chocolate or how much it's really just I
often crave chocolate or how much it's
just wanting to have some kind of
experience some kind of dopamine hit
yeah or noticing these things becomes
easier yeah yeah so for instance on all
the addictions you know coming from for
me coming from a house that was like had
a large amount of dysfunction alcoholism
I obviously brought some my own
addictions in like you know um I I
wrestled with nicotine marijuana in my
20s in all of those
cases a certain emotion that I allowed
release the
addiction so I like when I really got in
touch with my anger and that became
really fluid marijuana became completely
uninteresting to me as an example
so so it it does change how you want to
regulate yourself or how you want to eat
or what you're avoiding it doesn't by
the way it doesn't change it all the way
so don't don't don't this isn't like a a
cure all for that stuff because there is
like a physical addiction part of it
there's some other things that have to
be addressed um so I don't want to but I
don't know anybody who's increased their
emotional fluidity who their their
destructive habits haven't changed for
their better but I I also haven't met
anybody whose emotional fluidity really
inre and all of their destructive
patternss went away entirely there's you
know there's other things too um but
yeah so that's how I'd say it yeah yeah
I think I think ultimately ultimately is
this is a weird way to say but
ultimately what happens with emotional
fluidity like at the end of the day is
you get in contact with your inherent
goodness in a way that you weren't
before and um
because you're because so much of what
we consider bad like oh I'm bad and I
don't deserve or I don't I can't trust
myself or what did I do wrong all all
that stuff or I kind of deserve that
behavior that somewhat abusive
behavior all of that goes away with
emotional fluidity and you're just left
with like oh
I'm like if I can feel all this it's not
if I can feel all this stuff it's that I
am inherently good
and feeling all this stuff really allows
me to see that yeah yeah another another
piece there is
that it pulls you out of identity which
I think is a different different way of
saying the same thing yes because that's
right emotions are something that just
happened you can yeah you can sort of
predict how you're going to feel in
certain circumstances but research shows
that we're notoriously bad at predicting
are future emotional
responses and so if you are the more
that you are just with your emotional
experience the more that just opens up
awe and wonder for oneself and for one's
reality and just yeah deepens your
presence into it and really helps to
loosen up and dissolve some of the
preconceived notions or the the kind of
oied identities that we often live
within and that are that are also ways
that we stop ourselves from
feeling yeah I think there's you as
you're talking about it it like brings
something in it's
like there's certain things that the
identity uses to secure itself and like
um comparative mind like if I compare I
can tell the difference between me and
you and therefore there's a me and here
and this is how I Define myself um
another way is known reaction like oh
and if you can't know your reaction
like if I was like Brett you could no
longer predict your reaction to anything
who would Brett be right and most of our
reactions that we're predicting are
emotional
reactions it's not what we say it's how
we say it it's the emotion behind what
we're saying and so that it does
dissolve the the identity in this really
neat way it does do that and beautifully
put beautifully seen yeah and I love the
example of comparative mind too because
you can intellect compare yourself or
two paths you might take or a decision
you might make but if you are following
if you are fully allowing an emotional
experience there's going to be much
richer data for you yeah and it's going
to be much more present how does this
feel how does this feel rather than
right here's the pros and cons right
which is a useful frame at times but
it's not the only one right and even
even I thought you were going somewhere
else which I thought was really cool too
which was like even if you compare
yourself if you're comparative mind and
there's no
emotional friction behind it it's not
like most people when they compare
themselves it's like they're better than
me or I'm better than them but if you
let go of that feeling of being better
or being worse
than then all of a sudden even
comparative mind doesn't have the same
kind of yeah it's just data collection
it's not not making a new meaning to
suppress yourself with yeah yeah yeah
awesome beautiful that's cool this is
fun all right thank you so much that was
a great topic I appreciate it yeah yeah
I did too finally got around to this
one awesome all right good to see you
you too by thank you everybody for
listening uh please share this if you
really like this episode please share it
with a friend uh give us a rating or
review and uh if you have any
questions actually if you if if you
really like this episode hold it for
yourself and don't share it with anybody
ever yeah keep it keep it secret keep it
safe keep keep it secret if you share it
with somebody it'll only hurt you you'll
only lose
[Music]
part
okay probably should cut that but what
the all right uh we're leaving it
in all right okay thanks everybody thank
you Joe
bye